This is an interview with Brigadier General Gaber
Kidwell. Today's date is 8 June 1981. This is Terry
Anderson. This is a test in Dallas.
Okay, let's start then. Today's interview is with
Brigadier General Kidwell. Today is June 8, 1981.
Could you first start out by telling us where and
when you were born? I was born in Dallas down on the
corner of Ross and Fitchview on February the 4th,
1910.
Could you tell us about your parents? Let's start
with your father.
My father was Charles Weems Kidwell, who was born
in Louisiana, moved to Texas when he was a baby in
arms. And he grew up in Dallas. His mother brought
him here as a very young widow. Do you remember
approximately when he came to Dallas? In the 1880s
or 90s?
Well, that's something I have to look up. No, I
don't. I'm sure it was in the 1880s.
And he went to the schools here in Dallas and then
attended the Ed Rand Christian College. out of
Thorpe Springs, Texas, which is the forerunner of
Texas Christian University today. And Mr. Edison
Randall, a private schoolmaster, set this thing
up in conjunction with some Christian church
endeavors out of Thorpe Springs, which I've been
there with my father and seen the old ruins of this
school. Did it burn down or did they abandon it?
Well, I'm sure it burned down and the
Christian church decided to move it to Fort Worth.
And it's long since been abandoned. Did he have
four years of college education then? No, he did
not have four years of college education.
Financial hardships entered into the picture,
and he went to work for Sanger Brothers, a
department store operating in Dallas and Fort
Worth and in Waco. Mr. Alex Sanger and four German
immigrant brothers owned the store. And they
employed my father. And he worked there all his
life, all his adult life. A salesman? Well, he
started out as a salesman and got to be a department
head. And then he got to be assistant manager. And
then he got to be manager of the Dallas store. And
then he got to be general superintendent of the
Dallas, the Waco, and the Fort Worth stores. At
that time, it was a very responsible job. No
kidding. When did he become general
superintendent? When about was that?
I'm sure this was in the 1925
era, somewhere in there.
I was just starting in high school. I started high
school in 1924. So in that area. So he was in a
management or a leadership position also? He was
in management, right.
Because of his job and because he had two young
sons, he was not in the World War I. whether they
drafted him in those days or whether he got exempt
or what the story is. I don't know, but he was not in
the army. Could you describe him? What did he look
like? What kind of personality or character was
he? Well, he was very
extrovert. He loved people. naturally loved
people in his job. He loved helping people and he
was a great great civic worker and that he worked
with the in those days the they called it the
community chess drives. He was a big
worker and when they built the new YMCA here in
Dallas, he took up, I remember, over a half million
dollars himself, by himself, back in 1931 or
something like this, 30 or 31, which was some
doings. During the Depression, that's right.
Purely by his consistency and tenacity and not
giving up and letting somebody say, well, come
back next week. He stayed with them and he was
recognized at a dinner they had after they got
whatever amount of money, $750,000 or something
like that for their efforts. Dad was recognized
for it. Sounds like a hard worker. Well, he was a
very hard worker. He worked six days a week. And he
played with his kids the seventh day a week. And he
was a diligent church man. He worked in the church
and was of the First Presbyterian Church down in
Dallas. And he
was president of his class.
His high school clients? No, no. Down at the
church. Oh, OK, OK. Down at the church. He loved to
work with the kids in the neighborhood. And in the
event that was unusual, he'd gather up a whole
carload of kids and take us to show it to us where
there was a spectacular accident or the circus
came to town. They used to unload out here at Fair
Park. And we'd go out and watch the elephants help
unload the cars and watch the parade from the
fairgrounds down downtown where they always had a
circus down there by Pearl Street Market. And he'd
always get a cartload of kids and take us down
there. And he was a big worker in the
baseball league. They didn't call them little
leagues in those days. They were area leagues. We
had one in East Dallas and they had one in Oak Cliff.
They had a team in South Dallas. And he was a sponsor
there. He sponsored a lot of work with the dads
clubs at North Dallas High School. And that's
where I first became interested in army training
was at North Dallas.
He encouraged me. And I joined the junior OTCs
there and stayed with it right until. I retired in
1962. Let's, before we start talking about that,
let's talk about your mother. Can you tell me about
her? Mama was the 11th and last child of her family.
H.W. Graber and family. Grandfather Graber came
over from Hamburg, Germany as a young engineer.
and got off a boat down at Galveston and got a job
with the old Texas Midland Railroad Company. And
he railroaded up to Milliken, where the Civil War
caught him, and he joined the Texas Rangers
Regiment, which was a cavalry range of foraging
outfit. And he fought four years in the Civil War.
And during this time, he established himself as a
real leader of men, meaning that he led raiding
parties, gathering food and horses and animals,
cows and sheep for food for the armies. That's what
they were. They lived on the land and he was the
leader of one of these foraging parties and as such
he was captured twice. And once he escaped from
Union prison and then they let him out on parole on
the other time. Got tired of feeding him, I guess.
But after the war, he came back. And in that time,
he'd met a girl sometime during his, he met a girl
down in Courtney, Texas, who had befriended him
and helped him escape capture. And after the war,
he ended up at war over in Virginia. He came back to
Courtney, Texas, which is down below Navasota on
Lombardos. Courtney was a big...
cotton shipping town then, Port. They called it
Cotton Shipping Port. They had a pretty good size
warfare and they would haul cotton down to
Courtney and put it on barges and haul it on down to
Galveston. Anyway, he married this girl who was
down there visiting some of her folks and she lived
in Massachusetts. She was a Parks. And she, they
married and He railroaded from Milliken, or
whenever it was after the end of the war, Civil War,
up to Waxahachie, where he decided by that time he
had three or four children. And he decided that
railroading wasn't for a family man. And he quit
his railroading and set up a general store. We'd
call it a general mercantile store today. He sold
everything from coffee and beans and sugar to
harnesses and buggies and whips and plows and this
kind of thing. And where did he set that up? In
Waukesha Hatchie. Oh, I see. That's where he quit
railroading. And the railroad went on into Fort
Worth, but he quit in Waukesha Hatchie and set up
his general mercantile store there. Well, as
such, he He would trade a plow for a cow or trade a
bedroom suit for so many chickens or a calf or
something.
He made a good living for his wife and living kids.
He remembered his young college student in
Hamburg, Germany. of the Heine Boiler Company
there. And something motivated him to contact
them when he had this general mercantile store
there in Waukesha Hatchie to get the Heine Boiler
franchise for Texas. And he did that. And that
motivated him after he found that he could make
more money out of selling and installing boilers
than he could out of his mercantile store, he moved
to Dallas. And
he sold lots of boilers around, Heine boilers.
They were a very efficient coal-fired boiler in
those days. I know of two of them that still have his
name, or did have his name plates on them a year or so
ago. One that he put in at White Rock Water Pump
Station. and one down at the old Brown Cracker and
Candy Company down on Lamar Street. He installed
and sold them and installed them, and I'm sure
there were many, many more around town and in
Texas. He made a good living out of it and made some
money. And
after the war, I mean after he got too old to work, He
retired, of course, and wrote his memoirs of the
Civil War. Really? I've got a copy here. No
kidding. It was a great thing for the old
gentleman. He spent a lot of time doing that. I bet
you really enjoyed this. Oh, yeah.
And he reached the rank of general. No, no, no, no.
That is after the war in the United Confederate
Veterans Organization. Oh, I see. Like reserves
are today. He was commissary general, which means
quartermaster general today. Oh,
this is fantastic. 1916, this is published.
Well, I've sat on his knee by the hour and by the day,
and he tells me all the tales are here and there, and
this is a real trophy, a real... Sure is.
Heirloom. What impact do you think he had on your
mother? Well, certainly he was a stern
disciplinarian, In his own right, that was the way
he was brought up. And he was with my mother and all
the kids and with me, with my brother and me when we
came along. He was a distinguished gentleman,
very patient, very kind old gentleman.
I'm sure he was a tremendous influence on my
family. Was your father the authority in the
household then? You bet. You bet he was. My daddy
was very patient with my brother and me. My
brother's 20 months older than I am. And of course,
growing up like kids will do, we had our
differences. Oh, sure. And we're always at one
another's trying to excel in one another. Every
now and then, we'd get beyond our better
judgments, and we'd go to Fish City. And Mama would
tell him about it as soon as we got home. And boy, I'd
go to the woodshed. That's all there was to it. Went
to the woodshed, and he impressed on us. I wasn't
worried for his boys to act. The last lick he and I
got was for, I'll never forget,
I was always taught to say yes ma'am and no ma'am,
yes sir and no sir to anybody who's older than I am.
And I do it today. But one time my mother said
something to me, I don't know, I was sure I, I doubt
if I, I was probably in grammar school, but not
much, never very far in grammar school. And mama
asked me a question and I said no or yes, one, I
forget which. And she told Eddie when he came home
from work, hey, boy, go to the woodshed. I went to
the woodshed, and he came out and talked to me for 10
minutes, telling me that wasn't the way for young
boys to grow up, and it wasn't the way he wanted his
children to react. And then he got his belt off, and
he was impressing me with that.
And he broke his belt on me. Really? It was probably
an old belt. A leather belt? Huh? A leather belt?
Oh, yeah. It was an old leather belt, probably
rotten. And I may have had a grin on my face when he
broke that belt because he said, boy, you stay
there. And he went back in the house. He saved with
one of these old fashioned razors. It had a long
razor strap like he used to be home. And he brought
that razor strap out there. And he got my attention
with that razor strap. That's what he did. And
today I say yes sir, no sir, no ma'am, and yes ma'am
to any lady and to anybody that's older than I am.
That's one of the indelible things that I learned.
It didn't hurt me a bit in the world. It taught me a
lesson. I live by the day. Treat your brother the
same way? You bet. How many brothers did you have?
Just two? Just the two of us. Two kids in the family?
Just the two of us, yeah. Oh, yeah. He was a very
stern person, meaning he'd tell you to do
something, and he'd tell you why he wanted it done
that way. Like eating at the table. He'd say, I
don't care how much you take. You take three pieces
of chicken or four pieces of chicken. Take all the
chicken. But you can eat what's on your plate.
because we can't afford to waste it. And
he didn't have to say, boy, what's on the plate, put
twice to me. First time, he said it, and I didn't eat
it. And the second time, he said it, and he wham, and
I ended in the corner. And today, I don't take
anything and put it on the plate. I don't eat. I
clean my plate up. But he was a great person. I mean,
he indulged kids. He indulged me in the wind. and
sending me to the Hawaii schools and Hawaii camps.
He indulged us by buying me a new baseball mitt when
my mitt was old and rotted out where I left it out in
the rain and it got rotted. He would go play with us
on Saturday afternoon or Sunday, play ball with
all the kids in the neighborhood. And so for all of
his strict discipline, he was a great
leader for kids, is what I'm trying to say. And all
the kids in the neighborhood respect him, and
certainly I do. I did then, and I knew now. I don't
remember crossing him twice, and that was the time
when I said, yeah, not to my mother, and when I
didn't eat what was on my plate. And he told me the
first time, the second time, why he didn't. He told
me another way, and I respect it. Now, it sounds
like he had a definite impact on your career. No
question about it. In what way do you think he
helped you to succeed? Well, he taught me to think
straight and sit down and reason and convince
myself that what I was doing is right, and then to
follow through on it if it's right. at that
particular time is right today you know
situations change and that changes your your
decision but if you sit down and reason the thing
out with the best information you have at the time
that's right right thing to do at that time why
that's the right thing to do period
and that's the way i've always lived that's where
worked in my Army career, and that's where I ran my
business, and that's where I live today.
Okay, let's talk about your education. We haven't
touched on that. Could you tell me about that?
Well, I started in, we lived on the corner of Ross
and Fitcher, where I was born, and right across the
street from it, Caddy Wompert Cross Street, is
Fannin Grade School, which is still there. And
that's where I went to grammar school, grade
school, we called it in those days. I remember one
event that happened. It was a two-story building.
They had a square block, and the grade school sat
back in the far end of the block there, away from our
house. And I remember
it caught on fire one night, in retrospect, and
hearing all the discussion and everything, and
the arsonist set it on fire. an arsonist who wanted
to get even with his girlfriend, who was a teacher
there. Of course, I remember this back and hearing
my parents talk about it. But anyway, when the fire
engines came and they started putting the fire out
and all, my mother and my father looked for me in the
bed, and I wasn't there. So they knew exactly where
I was. And when they got in there looking for me,
they tell me the story that there I was tugging on
the fireman's coat. Please, Mr. Fireman, let it
burn a little more so I won't have to go to school
tomorrow.
But I went there. In other words, would it be fair to
say that you did not like grade school? No, this
typical kid reaction would burn the school down.
No, I loved school. I loved to be with the kids, and I
tried to... excelled in school. My daddy and my
uncle encouraged my brother and me both to excel.
And they had an incentive
program between them. Wanted to do it one year and
wanted to do it the next year. Offering
us and I think it started out in nickel and E. In
those days, they grade you
excellent, E for excellent,
an S for satisfactory, a P for passion, and a U for
unsatisfactory. And my father would give my
brother or me a nickel for each E we'd bring home.
And he wouldn't give us anything but a frown and
say, boy, do better when we brought home an S or a P.
I remember specifically he says, don't bring any
U's home.
And I knew that about- You'd never bring any home? I
knew enough by that time not to bring any home. No, I
didn't. Not until I got to A&M.
I started grammar school in 1917 and graduated in
1924, of course, seven years of grammar school. I
went over to North Dallas in 1924 and graduated in
1928.
What were your favorite subjects? I just took a
straight
course in high school with the idea of going to A&M
and studying engineering, meaning I took four
years of mathematics, four years of English, four
years of Latin. I don't know why I took Latin except
I had a little girlfriend who was studying Latin,
so That may have had some influence on me. I've
often said I should have taken four years of
Spanish, but I didn't. And then took the real usual
subjects of chemistry and physics and
some extra mathematics, extra algebra, and an
indoctrination course in calculus and that kind
of thing. You said that you had the idea that you
were going to go to A&M to study engineering. When
did you get this idea? When you were 13, 14, 15 years
old? I presume it was about that formerly age.
How'd you come about this idea? Well, I had a cousin
that I admired, and he went to A&M. Oh, I see. And he
would come home at Christmas time or during the
summer, and
he impressed me. that was place to go to be an
engineer and I had wanted to be an engineer. I've
always loved to build things and my cousin going
down there and he'd come home in his uniform and
that impressed me and when I got in high school I
decided to take ROTC and that's where I wanted to go
to A&M. And I set my heart on it and that's where my
family and I were able to swing the deal.
Would you consider yourself a leader in high
school in any way? Did you organize any groups? or
activities or sports or anything? Well, yes, I
played at sports. I never did
really excel in sports. Perhaps I didn't apply
myself to it because I had the size and all, but it
was more fun instead of trying to excel in it. It's
highly motivated today, and to me it was just a
relaxation and another something for me to do in my
spare time.
I was interested in
having an academic status rather than a physical
sports status. I set my heart on being an engineer
and my father and even my cousin who graduated down
there or who had been down there impressed
on me that you had to apply yourself and study. And
that sold me on going to A&M. And that's what
directed me just taking the standard four-year
course in high school of four years math, four
years English. four years Latin, and actually I
learned more English in Latin class than I did in
English class. I think that's fine basic
instruction for any youngster coming along, if he
can work it in his curriculum, and I did. So when you
graduated from high school then, you had a firm set
of goals or aims that you already wanted to
accomplish. Yes, I had made up my mind I wanted to be
an engineer. Now why was that? During the summers I
worked in, my cousin first. And during the summers
I had worked on construction jobs as a water boy
first, and then as a timekeeper, and then as a kind
of a office boy. running errands for the
superintendent, or going and getting some
equipment, or going and getting some material, or
this kind of thing. And
I wanted to be an engineer. I wanted the
engineering training, ultimately, to get into
the construction business for myself. And so I
planted that seed back in those days and finally
germinated in 1952.
when I set up this company. Actually I had a partner
but that lasted for a while and then I bought him out
and I ran it from 1964. That's when I bought him out
and I've run it ever since until July 1st last year
when I sold it. Tell me about your first
impressions of A&M.
Well, it's any good, bad, and any different.
My
first impression of A&M is that my father and my
mother put me on a train. The old Lyle had used to
leave Dallas at 11.30 at night and got down to
College Station about 4.30 in the morning. And
they packed me up with a suitcase, And
I guess a footlocker, something like that. Put me
on the train and wished me well. And I got off this
train down at the old station, which sat across, is
that Highway 5 or Highway 6 runs up and down there?
6. 6. And that was between the railroad station and
the campus, the old main academic building, which
was the campus. They had that esplanade with the
lights going up there. And got off and got off the
train and of course nobody knew anything about
where to go, what you do. And it was some
enterprise, some sophomore down there, selling
brooms and this kind of thing too. you need a broom
sweep your room out and all that kind of thing. And
it seemed like I walked a hundred miles getting up
to the academic building where A&M had some person
in authority and said you make yourselves at home
and this is where you want to be at eight o'clock and
we'll matriculate and go from there. and uh he said
you can carry did you carry that big case oh no i
carried my suitcase but i didn't carry the
footlocker i just just left that down there it was
it was baggage so to speak and they unloaded all
that on the loading docks and i went down there
after i found out i was going to live in goodman hall
this gentleman admitted us also said you can walk
right down this way that big, long building down
there, which is a piece of hall, and you can get
something to eat if you're hungry. So when the sun
came up, a bunch of us said, let's go get something
to eat. And we went and got something to eat,
waiting until 8 o'clock came when the advisors got
out and
told us how to go about matriculating. And we took
our choice of what branch of the service we wanted
to be in. And there were three of us from North
Dallas High School that went down. I'd always
loved to ride horses in my younger days. And so
as an engineering student, we had the choice of
being in the engineers or the field artillery. And
I chose field artillery. And these other two boys
wanted to go into the cavalry, but I persuaded
them. we all three went in the field artillery. And
that's where I started in the field artillery and
training and of course it stayed right with me
until I retired. I was one of the very fortunate
field artillerymen to be able to have trained all
the way through from an old French 75 through the
horse-drawn artillery and through the motorized
artillery and through the rocket artillery up to
the Zeus and Nike, which is where I left them. And
that was a
very fortunate day, a complete cycle of military
armament from a pea shooter up to the rockets as we
know them today. Yeah, a revolution. A real
revolution. Just like we've had the machine
revolution and the social revolution, there was a
real revolution in hardware in the Army. Now let's
talk about A&M for a minute here, and what I'd like
to know is did the military, the aspect that A&M was
a military institution, did that have anything to
do with your decision, or when did you first become
interested in the military? When I went to high
school, I joined the ROTC there. And I continually
worked at it, meaning I participated in all the
events,
meaning they had the crack company, which was a
represented North Dallas High School in
competition against the other four high schools
at that time, the other three high schools at that
time. They only had four high schools in Dallas in
those days. And we had rifle competition. Margin
and drill competition? Drill competition,
purely and simply drill competition as a company
unit. Right. We won it one year and we got beat three
years and
win some, lose some, you know. What did you like
about down? Well, I love the artillery. I love the
competition in it. I said artillery, I mean the
drill. I love the drill and the competition in it.
And because I worked at it, I got promoted to
corporal, and then sergeant, and then six
striper, sergeant major, and then I don't know, I
guess my junior year I got promoted to lieutenant,
and my senior year I was promoted to captain, and
the company commander, which was up the line, you
know. I
participated in the rifles competition, the
pistol competition, And we participated in horse
competitions. We were using the old 112th
Cavalry, which National Guard troop horses. Our
commandant over in North Dallas had a friend that
commanded one of the troops in the 112th Cavalry.
And he would let us come out and exercise the horses
on Saturday, meaning that we could ride them and
run them. And that was a real fun and a real
challenge. And that
confirmed my love for horses and it eventually
showed up in the artillery.
Yeah. So in other words, you had a position of
leadership as early as high school in the
military. Yes, I was a company commander and
I commanded the crack company, but we didn't win
the competition. But I'm sure I'll lose some of
this, I don't know what to say about that. Sure, oh
yeah. Tell me about your, when you got to A&M and you
were on the Aggie Corps, could you tell me about
your outfit? Well, I was in B battery field
artillery the whole time. I started over there in
Goodwin Hall.
We lived two years in Goodwin, one year in Milner,
and one year in Mitchell Halls. I don't know
whether Goodwin's still there or not. I think it
is, yeah. Milner and Mitchell are still there. I
think they've renovated those, but I don't know
about Goodwin. There was Goodwin, and right
behind it is
the Zell Hall, and then the chapel was on down at the
end of the military old drag there, the old chapel
where we went to church.
I rocked along and
made average grades. I didn't excel because I was
having fishitis, I guess you'd call it. They don't
participate in that type of hazing anymore, but
they sure did in my era. Well, can you tell me about
some of the experiences, those hazing
experiences? Well, at this upperclassmen-run
company, company commander is a senior, of
course, and he ran it, and he delegated his
authority to the first sergeant, and the first
sergeant ran the housekeeping of it, and
sophomores did all the the hazing, so to speak, and
being sophomores and making the freshmen
adhere to their likings and dislikings. It's all
good fun. It was a typical A&M tradition. And I
don't regret one moment of it. I say that the change
has been all for the better. Perhaps it was
excessive in my day, but I don't begrudge it. Every
sophomore and junior and one or two seniors that
whipped my ass, I respected tremendously because
they were my seniors. And sometimes I didn't clean
their room like they thought I ought to. I was
reprimanded for it, but that was part of the fun of
being a freshman, a fish. I
don't think it
hurt me a bit, and it certainly, I think, made a
better man of being able to take punishment and
liking it. And every time that
One of them whipped my ass. I got up and thanked him
for it, for straightening me out. And that was the
tradition of A&M at that time. And
these gentlemen who you're talking to will tell
you the same story. Yeah, I know. It's just
interesting. It was a tradition in those days. And
if you stayed past the first Thanksgiving, why,
you could live with anything. People that
were completely obsessed with going to A&M and
participating in
the core traditions didn't come back after
Thanksgiving. Or certainly they didn't come back
after Christmas, the first year. And if you stayed
that first four months, five months, the only
reason you left A&M was because of academic
deficiency. Did a lot of people drop out?
Because of what now? Because of the hazing? Did a
lot of your colleagues say, well, I just don't want
to take this? Do you remember? Well, I'm sure some
of them did. I'm sure some of them did.
My two roommates dropped out at One of them dropped
out at the end of our fish year because of academic
deficiency. They wouldn't let him return. And the
other one dropped out at the end of my sophomore
year because of financial considerations.
I doubt if 10% of them dropped out because of this
so-called hazing. I doubt it because Then a boy
didn't go down there unless he was obsessed with
wanting to go to A&M and wanting to be in the Corps.
You had to be in the Corps to go there. Or you were
classified as a casual, meaning you had a physical
disability and you had to wear a uniform at that.
But if you had a physical disability, well, you
could go be a casual, but you wore the uniform. So
everybody was in uniform, everybody was the same.
Rich men, poor men, sons are all the same. And the
only thing that separates you was your academic
leadership or qualifications and your ROTC. Did
you like the fact that you were all the same? Did I
like the fact? You bet. You bet because Those were
hard times. Sure were. Those were hard times. And
I'm sure there were some rich men's sons there. But
my father wasn't a rich man. And he had two of us in
college at the same time. And my brother went to
University of Texas. And I was A&M. And so I worked
while I was down there. Can you tell me what you did?
I worked. doing everything, anything I could get a
job at doing. I worked in Spesa Hall. I worked
building help as labor on Saturdays, helped
building the then chemistry building, the new
chemistry building, and I'm sure it's been
enlarged many times since then. Dr. Hedges was the
head of the chemistry department at that time. I
worked over there as a laborer. I worked down in the
agronomy lab grinding up samples of dirt and
running tests for old Dr. Asbury, who was one of the
old great saints of A&M at that time. Do you
remember what you made? As I remember,
15 cents an hour.